Doc(eos_designs): How-to Guide - Connected Endpoint and Node Types (#5882)
aristanetworks/ansible-avd: docs/howto/connected_endpoints.md

<!--
  ~ Copyright (c) 2025 Arista Networks, Inc.
  ~ Use of this source code is governed by the Apache License 2.0
  ~ that can be found in the LICENSE file.
  -->

# How-to Guide: Connected Endpoints

## Introduction to Connected Endpoints

> The **`connected_endpoints`** data model in AVD is a structured way to define the interfaces that connect to your leaf switches. Instead of manually creating `interface Ethernet...` configurations for every server, you describe the connections in your YAML inventory, and AVD generates the complete, standardized configuration for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **`connected_endpoints`** data model in AVD is a structured way to define the interfaces that connect to your leaf switches. Instead of manually creating `interface Ethernet...` configurations for every server, you describe the connections using a data model, and AVD generates the complete, standardized configuration for you.
```

This model is typically defined directly under the leaf switch's data model, for example, in `host_vars/<leaf_name>.yml` or a group file like `group_vars/LEAFS.yml`.

> The core of this model revolves around a powerful concept called **Port Profiles**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core of this model revolves around the concept called **Port Profiles**.
```
